.. _Code-Generation-Modes:

===================================
Code Generation Modes (wiki-import)
===================================
.. note:: This article was migrated from the wiki (Fri, 25 Jul 2014 04:21) and is now the "master copy" (the version in the wiki will be deleted). It may not be a perfect rendering of the original but we hope to fix that soon!

Code Generation Modes
=====================

One of the reasons for writing Emscripten itself in JavaScript was to be
able to easily test different methods of generating code. As a
consequence, Emscripten currently supports various code generation
modes, each with different features.

Typed Arrays
------------

Typed arrays are currently enabled by default (in mode 2, see below),
because that has the greatest support for arbitrary code.

There are two modes for typed arrays in Emscripten, 1 and 2. To explain
them, first recall how Emscripten manages memory **without** typed
arrays: It uses ``HEAP`` to represent memory, where ``HEAP`` is a normal
JavaScript array. We write to the first address of multi-byte values to
keep things fast, so writing a 32-bit integer will end up as
``[value, 0, 0, 0]`` - we do not write anything to the upper 3 bytes. We
will also read just from the first location. This is much faster than
splitting things up into bytes and vice versa, but requires that we have
"load-store consistency", which is that if we read a value, we wrote the
same type there. (Otherwise, if we write a 32-bit int and read the
second byte, we won't get what we expect.) ``SAFE_HEAP`` when enabled
will check for violations of load-store consistency.

Disabling typed arrays can be done with ``USE_TYPED_ARRAYS=0``. This is
safer in the sense that not all browsers support typed arrays. However,
typed arrays can be optimized very well in some cases, and can support
code that does not have load-store consistency.

Typed Arrays Mode 1
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

With ``USE_TYPED_ARRAYS=1``, two typed arrays will represent memory. One
will contain integer values, the other float values. When we write an
integer to memory, we write to the first, and when we write a float, we
write to the second. (LLVM is typed, so we always know what values we
are writing/reading.) Otherwise, this mode is identical to without typed
arrays: We still require load-store consistency and so forth.

The benefit of this mode is that memory is implemented as two typed
arrays, which JavaScript engines can often optimize very well. The
downsides, though are

-  In things like memcpy, where we don't know the types, we must copy
   **both** arrays.
-  We can take more memory than without typed arrays, since we have two
   arrays now for memory, one of which uses 32 bits for each memory
   address, and one of which uses 64.
-  We cannot dynamically resize these arrays in an easy way. If you try
   to use more memory than was originally set up, we need to create new
   typed arrays and copy everything into them, which is slow. Setting
   the total size of memory (``TOTAL_MEMORY``) can avoid this, but only
   if you know in advance the maximum you will need.
-  Not all LLVM optimizations are possible, and not all C/C++ code is
   compatible with this mode.

This mode is generally much faster than mode 0, but often slower then
mode 2.

Typed Arrays Mode 2
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

This is the default mode.

With ``USE_TYPED_ARRAYS=2``, one typed array buffer will represent
memory, while different views into it will allow us to access different
types (:js:data:`HEAPU32` for 32-bit unsigned integers, for example). Because
of that, it is possible to violate the load-store consistency
assumption: The different views show the same data. You can write a
32-bit integer, then read a byte from the middle, and it will work just
like in C or C++.

The main benefit of this mode is that it uses as much memory on the heap
as C and C++ normally do. We are literally laying things out in memory
as they do. This mode is also quite fast in many cases. Also, you can
successfully run code that does not have load-store consistency. There
are two downsides though,

-  Because of how typed array views work, we must do pointer shifts: To
   access a 32-bit value at memory location X, we need to read from the
   32-bit view at index X divided by 4 (since it looks like an array,
   whose indexes each represent 4 bytes). So the code ends up filled
   with ``<<2``, ``>>2`` and so forth. We can optimize this some more,
   but it will remain an overhead. (However, other binary data APIs are
   coming to JavaScript which can help here.)
-  We currently align the stack and so forth to 4-byte boundaries. This
   means that reading 8-byte values is slower (we must read them in two
   parts, and combine them, see ``I64_MODE`` and ``DOUBLE_MODE``,
   below).

Note that ``SAFE_HEAP``, in this mode, will ignore load-store
consistency violations, since they don't matter. Alignment of reads and
writes, though, will be checked, which is important since reading
unaligned values will fail as mentioned earlier.

64-bit Integer Modes
--------------------

As mentioned earlier, 64-bit integers cannot be represented directly in
JavaScript, whose numbers are doubles, which cannot contain all 64-bit
integer values. In typed arrays mode 2, we implement 64-bit integers as
pairs of 32-bit values, but we do not emulate addition and
multiplication, instead we perform that as doubles - which is faster.
Bit operations like and and or, however, are done with full precision.

Note that in modes other than typed arrays mode 2, we implement 64-bit
integers entirely as doubles. If you need 64-bit integers to work, use
typed arrays mode 2.

Double Mode
-----------

In every mode but typed arrays mode 2, doubles work fine in a simple
manner. However, in typed arrays mode 2 we cannot read unaligned
doubles, because of the typed array API. Therefore the default behavior
here is ``DOUBLE_MODE=1``, in which we carefully read doubles as two
32-bit values, to not hit alignment problems. This is slower than mode
0, obviously.

It should be possible to modify clang to always align doubles to 64-bit
boundaries (gcc has ``-malign-double``), this should be investigated -
it would mean we no longer need mode 1 here.

Exceptions
----------

Exceptions can work in code compiled by emscripten, however due to how
JS engines work they are typically very slow (all JS engines currently
disable most optimizations inside ``try {} catch() {}`` blocks...). For
that reason, in ``-O1`` and above emscripten disables exception catching
by default, because often LLVM generates code that can catch exceptions
even when it isn't needed (in C++, exception catching often has zero
cost unless an exception actually happens, so there is little downside
there, but in JS there is).

To get full exception handling support in ``-O1`` and above, run emcc
with ``-s DISABLE_EXCEPTION_CATCHING=0``. Note that enabling exceptions
will make the code larger due to the additional try-catch blocks (which
cannot be minified very well).

Memory Compression (a.k.a QUANTUM\_SIZE == 1)
---------------------------------------------

By default, Emscripten sets QUANTUM\_SIZE to 4, which means that a
'normal' element - like an int or a pointer - takes 4 'bytes'. That is
the normal behavior on 32-bit systems, and allows Emscripten to properly
compile a great deal of C/C++ code. However, the downside is that each
int or pointer takes 4 places in the HEAP array, which is how Emscripten
models the normal C/C++ memory space. This makes HEAP much bigger than
it needs to be, which takes more memory, and also slows things down (for
example, memset ends up clearing larger areas of memory).

By setting QUANTUM\_SIZE to 1, memory is 'compressed' - it is not longer
isomorphic to normal C/C++ memory. So for example a structure with an
int, a double, and a pointer would have a size of 3 (one for each
variable), instead of the normal 16 (4 for the int and pointer, 8 for
the double). This leads to significantly more optimized code, both in
terms of speed and memory use.

However, this is risky, since with QUANTUM\_SIZE of 1, Emscripten
rewrites the .ll, trying to fix all the hardcoded places where it
assumes the normal memory space. So consider this experimental for now.

Notes:

-  With QUANTUM\_SIZE == 1, Emscripten will warn you about ptrtoint and
   inttoptr operations (in the generated .js file). You should make sure
   there are no problems in each of those cases, and perhaps modify the
   original C/C++ to avoid generating that kind of code (the changes are
   often simple).
-  You can **not** use QUANTUM\_SIZE == 1 with typed arrays mode 2. The
   reason is that typed arrays mode 2 is C-like memory layout, whereas
   in QUANTUM\_SIZE == 1 we radically change the layout (ints take 1
   memory address instead of 4, etc.), and the two can't be mixed.

The second version of the Bullet demo in Emscripten uses QUANTUM\_SIZE
== 1. It appears to give a speedup of around 25%.
